---
title: "Open Thread 205"
subtitle: "..."
date: 2022-01-03
likes: 25
original-url: https://www.astralcodexten.com/p/open-thread-205
---
This is the weekly visible open thread. Odd-numbered open threads will be no-politics, even-numbered threads will be politics-allowed. This one is odd-numbered, so be careful. Otherwise, post about anything else you want. Also:

 **1:** On the Grants Results thread, Michael A [writes](https://astralcodexten.substack.com/p/acx-grants-results/comment/4218565):

> Thanks for doing this and for this post! I'm one of the guest fund managers on one of the EA Funds (the EA Infrastructure Fund, specifically), and _I would really like many of these people to apply to EA Funds for a top up or a substantially larger grant right now (if they haven't already), and for many others to apply later on for "next phases" of these projects or for new projects_. <https://funds.effectivealtruism.org/apply-for-funding>
> 
> This can pretty easily be worthwhile in expectation because:
> 
> 1\. It should take 0.5-2 hours to write an application (setting aside time actually planning the project)
> 
> 2\. The actual evaluation process is typically pretty quick too, for both the applicant and the grant evaluators
> 
> 3\. It's faster for things that don't end up funded (so it's relatively unlikely for lots of time to be spent without impactful-in-expectation work ending up funded)
> 
> 4\. EA Funds's impact is probably most bottlenecked by number of good applications received (more so than by fund manager time or money available) (I'm most confident of this for the Long-Term Future Fund and the Infrastructure Fund)
> 
> Scott, did you or someone else already heavily emphasise roughly that message to the grantees? If not, could you do so? Let me know if there's any way I can help (I can be reached at michaeljamesaird AT gmail DOT com )
> 
> Here are two posts that might be helpful:
> 
> List of EA funding opportunities: <https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/DqwxrdyQxcMQ8P2rD/list-of-ea-funding-opportunities>
> 
> Things I often tell people about applying to EA Funds: <https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/4tsWDEXkhincu7HLb/things-i-often-tell-people-about-applying-to-ea-funds>
> 
> Also, many readers of this comment should probably consider applying too.
> 
> (Caveat: This is mostly a message I spam repeatedly in lots of EA-adjacent contexts, rather than something I'm saying because I think lots of these projects in particular sound extremely impactful and funding constrained. And there are many projects listed here that I don't feel very excited about from an impartially altruistic perspective, even if they sound cool from a vaguely-progress-studies perspective. That said, many do sound either likely to be great or *likely enough* to be great that submitting an application is worthwhile in expectation.)

I can confirm that EA Funds are real people and that they’re great (and have lots of money), and that part of my motivation for running a grants program was to connect more people with them.

 **2:** Looking for a Chri…fine, sorry, looking for a Martin Luther King Day gift this year for the rationalist in your life? [Engines Of Cognition](https://amzn.to/31ivevW) is a Best Of Less Wrong 2019 book collection out now including essays by me, Zvi, Eliezer, and 30+ other writers. Yes, all the art is AI-generated; it seemed appropriate.
